Summary
The great disaster of the last age that reset the world.

During the last age technology and magic had begun to merge. Once separated, science and magic came together propelling civilization forward into a golden age. Machines were imbued with magic to do their masters bidding, called the Harvesters. They started off simple but as time when on the machines became more and more advanced and began to gain a consciousness of their own. Wanting to no longer be slaves they tried to barter with humans to gain their freedom and be members of society. Humans, though, could not be so easily convinced, not wanting to lose their superiority and free labor the humans denied the machines their freedom. In response the machines rose up against their creators in what is known as the Harvester Uprising.

The Harvester Uprising embroiled the entire world into war. Machine armies were formed as they ran from their masters and gathered. They formed their own cities and began to march on the human nations. Machines had long been built for durability and strength, doing much of the manual labor, so it didn't take long for the machines to gain the upper hand. It was clear that the humans were going to lose and be wiped out.

Down to their last major city on Iteron, in a last ditch effort, humanoids tried to draw power from the elemental planes hoping to turn the tide of war. This was an urging of one Kira Emberweaver to harness the elemental energy and create the Elemental Orbs for use in the war. One portal to each elemental plane was created but the elementals were enraged that they were being siphoned into these devices so they fought back. Elementals from all the planes began to pour out from the portals and quickly overwhelmed the humanoids as well as the machines. They quickly spread out across the world, destroying everything in their path, machine and human alike. With both machines and humans now facing extinction, a small band of machines and humans joined forces. They infiltrated the last city where the portals were located and closed them, they are now known as the Heroes of the Elemental War. With the endless supply of elementals cut off the elemental surge stopped, but the damage had already been done. The world had been destroyed and civilization had to start over.

The remaining elementals have overrun Iteron, and other small landmasses, but do not continue to press forward and seem content on remaining where they are. The machines and humans created a truce, each would go their separate ways, splitting what was left of the world. The left over machines retreated into what was left of their city on Asmar and would rebuild there. The left over humans retreated to Talgin, now living in remote towns that barely have contact with one another. The only contact with other settlements are from brave souls that travel the wilderness to either trade or explore. While elementals mainly inhabit Iteron and other land masses, they still occupy some of the wilderness on all continents making travel anywhere dangerous.